## Hello World

### Writing a workflow

First we will start with the classic Helo World example:

```yaml
steps:
- echo:
    in:
      message: Hello World
```

A workflow is just a list of steps. Here we just have a single step, which executes the unix `echo` command with the input `Hello World`. Workflows are written in YAML format. We will discuss the YAML syntax later, but for now just note that **indentation is important**. In particular, the `in:` tag must be indented two spaces beyond the step name (`echo` in this case). Similarly, all of the inputs must be indented two spaces beyond the `in:` tag (`message` in this case).

### Running a workflow

From the main directory (the directory containing `examples/`), run the following command:

`wic --yaml examples/tutorials/helloworld.yml --run_local --quiet`

(We will discuss how you can run from other directories later.)

```
 starting examples/tutorials/helloworld.yml
finishing examples/tutorials/helloworld.yml
Running cwltool --quiet --leave-tmpdir --leave-outputs --provenance provenance --cachedir cachedir autogenerated/helloworld.cwl autogenerated/helloworld_inputs.yml
{
    "helloworld__step__1__echo___stdout": {
        "location": "file:///Users/jakefennick/workflow_inference_compiler/cachedir/1afd0b54f99184d3248e510e98e39926/stdout",
        "basename": "stdout",
        "class": "File",
        "checksum": "sha1$648a6a6ffffdaa0badb23b8baf90b6168dd16b3a",
        "size": 12,
        "path": "/Users/jakefennick/workflow_inference_compiler/cachedir/1afd0b54f99184d3248e510e98e39926/stdout"
    },
    "output_all": null
}
Success! Output files should be in outdir/
```

Everything worked, so the following was printed out:

* The files that were compiled (starting ... finishing)
* The command that was used to invoke the runtime system
* The output of the runtime system (nothing in this case)
* The detailed results (everything in curly brackets). You can usually ignore the detailed results.
* A friendly message to look in `outdir/` for your files.

For this workflow, the file `outdir/helloworld/step 1 echo/stdout/stdout` indeed contains `Hello World`.

On the other hand, if something went wrong you will see:
```
Failure! Please scroll up and find the FIRST error message.
(You may have to scroll up A LOT.)
```

The detailed results are technically in "JSON" format, and for more complex workflows it can be VERY verbose. Hence, you may need to scroll up several pages (or more) until you find the FIRST error message. If there is not enough information printed to determine the error, try running it again without the `--quiet` flag.

Finally, note that to avoid recalculating intermediate steps, by default the runtime saves all of the results in `cachedir/`. So if you suspect there is something wrong with an earlier step, you can just `rm -rf autogenerated/ cachedir* outdir/ provenance/` and then run the entire workflow from scratch.
